EC2 network topology tutorial (#1515)
aws-controllers-k8s/community: docs/content/docs/tutorials/ec2-example.md

access to an Amazon EKS cluster. If this is your first time creating an Amazon EKS cluster and Amazon ECR repository, see [Amazon EKS Setup][eks-setup] and [Amazon ECR Setup](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonECR/latest/userguide/get-set-up-for-amazon-ecr.html). 
 

### Prerequisites
 
This guide assumes that you have:
 
- Created an EKS cluster with Kubernetes version 1.16 or higher.
- Have access to Amazon ECR
- AWS IAM permissions to create roles and attach policies to roles.
- Installed the following tools on the client machine used to access your Kubernetes cluster:
  - [AWS CLI](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/install-cliv1.html) - A command line tool for interacting with AWS services.
  - [kubectl](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/install-kubectl.html) - A command line tool for working with Kubernetes clusters.
  - [eksctl](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/eksctl.html) - A command line tool for working with EKS clusters.
  - [Helm 3.8+](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/) - A tool for installing and managing Kubernetes applications.

>   - [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) - A tool to build, share, and run containers.

Reviewer: why do i need Docker?

 
 
### Install ACK EC2-Controller
 
Deploy the EC2-Controller using the Helm chart, [ec2-chart](https://gallery.ecr.aws/aws-controllers-k8s/ec2-chart). Note, this example creates resources in the `us-west-2` region, but you can use any other region supported in AWS.
 
* Log into the Helm registry that stores the ACK charts:
 
```bash

> aws ecr-public get-login-password --region us-west-2 | helm registry login --username AWS --password-stdin public.ecr.aws

Reviewer: i got the following error. what does this mean?
`An error occurred (UnsupportedCommandException) when calling the GetAuthorizationToken operation: GetAuthorizationToken command is only supported in us-east-1.`

helm install --create-namespace -n ack-system oci://public.ecr.aws/aws-controllers-k8s/ec2-chart "--version=${RELEASE_VERSION}" --generate-name --set=aws.region=us-west-2
```
 
For a full list of available values in the Helm chart, refer to [values.yaml](https://github.com/aws-controllers-k8s/ec2-controller/blob/main/helm/values.yaml).
 
 
### Configure IAM permissions
 
The controller requires permissions to invoke EC2 APIs. Once the service controller is deployed [configure the IAM permissions](https://aws-controllers-k8s.github.io/community/docs/user-docs/irsa/) using the value `SERVICE=ec2` throughout. The recommended IAM Policy for EC2-Controller can be found in [recommended-policy-arn](https://github.com/aws-controllers-k8s/ec2-controller/blob/main/config/iam/recommended-policy-arn).
 
 
### [Optional] Create a VPC and Subnet
 
This section is optional and will NOT be using a single manifest file to deploy the VPC and Subnet. The purpose of this section is to demonstrate a simple use case to shed light on some of the functionality before jumping into a more complex deployment.
 
* Create the **VPC** using the provided YAML and `kubectl apply`:
```

> cat <<EOF > vpc.yaml

Reviewer: I did not set up IAM permissions and deployed the VPC. The State column is empty. I can do a describe and get the error but there has to be a state

`dsaurya@3c063003223c ~ % k get vpc
NAME                ID    STATE
vpc-tutorial-test`

Reviewer: I would also call out the error one would get if IAM permissions are not set up.

metadata:
  name: tutorial-private-subnet1
spec:
  availabilityZone: us-west-2a
  cidrBlock: 10.0.128.0/20
  vpcRef:
    from:
      name: tutorial-vpc
  routeTableRefs:
  - from:
      name: tutorial-private-route-table-az1
---
apiVersion: ec2.services.k8s.aws/v1alpha1
kind: SecurityGroup
metadata:
  name: tutorial-security-group
spec:
  description: "ack security group"
  name: tutorial-sg
  vpcRef:
     from:
       name: tutorial-vpc
  ingressRules:
    - ipProtocol: tcp
      fromPort: 22
      toPort: 22
      ipRanges:
        - cidrIP: "0.0.0.0/0"
          description: "ingress"
```
 
The output should look similar to:
```
vpc.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-vpc created
internetgateway.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-igw created
natgateway.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-natgateway1 created
elasticipaddress.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-eip1 created
routetable.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-public-route-table created
routetable.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-private-route-table-az1 created
subnet.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-public-subnet1 created
subnet.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-private-subnet1 created
securitygroup.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-security-group created
```
 

> * Check the **Custom Resource's** using `kubectl describe`:

Reviewer: could also add all the crds installed 

`dsaurya@3c063003223c ~ % k get crd
NAME                                         CREATED AT
adoptedresources.services.k8s.aws            2022-10-23T16:35:34Z
dhcpoptions.ec2.services.k8s.aws             2022-10-23T16:35:33Z
elasticipaddresses.ec2.services.k8s.aws      2022-10-23T16:35:33Z
eniconfigs.crd.k8s.amazonaws.com             2022-10-22T00:04:17Z
fieldexports.services.k8s.aws                2022-10-23T16:35:34Z
instances.ec2.services.k8s.aws               2022-10-23T16:35:33Z
internetgateways.ec2.services.k8s.aws        2022-10-23T16:35:33Z
natgateways.ec2.services.k8s.aws             2022-10-23T16:35:33Z
routetables.ec2.services.k8s.aws             2022-10-23T16:35:33Z
securitygrouppolicies.vpcresources.k8s.aws   2022-10-22T00:04:20Z
securitygroups.ec2.services.k8s.aws          2022-10-23T16:35:33Z
subnets.ec2.services.k8s.aws                 2022-10-23T16:35:33Z
transitgateways.ec2.services.k8s.aws         2022-10-23T16:35:33Z
vpcendpoints.ec2.services.k8s.aws            2022-10-23T16:35:34Z
vpcs.ec2.services.k8s.aws                    2022-10-23T16:35:34Z`

    Reason:
    Status:                         True
    Type:                           ACK.ResourceSynced
  Default For AZ:                   false
  Map Customer Owned IP On Launch:  false
  Owner ID:                         515336597380
  Private DNS Name Options On Launch:
  State:      available
  Subnet ID:  subnet-<ID>
 
```
 
### Validate
 
This network setup should allow Instances deployed in the Private Subnet to connect to the internet. To validate this behavior deploy an Instance into the Private Subnet and the Public Subnet (bastion host). After deployments, `ssh` into the bastion host, then `ssh` into the Private Subnet Instance, and test internet connection. Security group is required by both instances launched in public and private subnets.
 
* Deploy an Instance into the Private Subnet:
 
```
apiVersion: ec2.services.k8s.aws/v1alpha1
kind: Instance
metadata:
  name: tutorial-instance-private
spec:
  imageID: ami-02b92c281a4d3dc79 # AL2; us-west-2
  instanceType: c3.large
  subnetID: subnet-<private-ID>
  securityGroupIDs:
  	- sg-<ID>
  keyName: us-west-2-key # created via console
  tags:
    - key: producer
      value: ack
```

>  

Reviewer: add  `kubectl apply -f tutorial-instance-private.yaml`

* Deploy an Instance into the Public Subnet:
 
```
apiVersion: ec2.services.k8s.aws/v1alpha1
kind: Instance
metadata:
  name: tutorial-instance-public
spec:
  imageID: ami-02b92c281a4d3dc79 # AL2 in us-west-2
  instanceType: c3.large
  subnetID: subnet-<public-ID>
  securityGroupIDs:

>   	- sg-<ID>

Reviewer: there is a formatting error here
`dsaurya@3c063003223c ~ % k apply -f tutorial-instance-public.yaml
error: error parsing tutorial-instance-public.yaml: error converting YAML to JSON: yaml: line 10: found character that cannot start any token`

Author: cross-checked the yaml file, there is an indentation error while adding `SecurityGroupIDs`, will fix this!

  keyName: us-west-2-key # created via console
  tags:
    - key: producer
      value: ack

> ```

Reviewer: add `kubectl apply -f tutorial-instance-public.yaml`

  - [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) - A tool to build, share, and run containers.
 
 
### Install ACK EC2-Controller
 
Deploy the EC2-Controller using the Helm chart, [ec2-chart](https://gallery.ecr.aws/aws-controllers-k8s/ec2-chart). Note, this example creates resources in the `us-west-2` region, but you can use any other region supported in AWS.
 
* Log into the Helm registry that stores the ACK charts:
 
```bash
aws ecr-public get-login-password --region us-west-2 | helm registry login --username AWS --password-stdin public.ecr.aws
```

* Install Helm chart:
 
```bash
SERVICE=ec2
RELEASE_VERSION=$(curl -sL "https://api.github.com/repos/aws-controllers-k8s/${SERVICE}-controller/releases/latest" | grep '"tag_name":' | cut -d'"' -f4)
helm install --create-namespace -n ack-system oci://public.ecr.aws/aws-controllers-k8s/ec2-chart "--version=${RELEASE_VERSION}" --generate-name --set=aws.region=us-west-2
```
 
For a full list of available values in the Helm chart, refer to [values.yaml](https://github.com/aws-controllers-k8s/ec2-controller/blob/main/helm/values.yaml).
 
 
### Configure IAM permissions
 

> The controller requires permissions to invoke EC2 APIs. Once the service controller is deployed [configure the IAM permissions](https://aws-controllers-k8s.github.io/community/docs/user-docs/irsa/) using the value `SERVICE=ec2` throughout. The recommended IAM Policy for EC2-Controller can be found in [recommended-policy-arn](https://github.com/aws-controllers-k8s/ec2-controller/blob/5414fc242d29af59309b4191b5a085439bf8730a/config/iam/recommended-policy-arn#L1).

Reviewer 2: If we are linking to the latest version for `RELEASE_VERSION`, then we should link to the `main` branch version of `recommended-policy-arn`

Events:                    <none>
```
 
* The **VPC** resource synced successfully and is available. Note the `vpc-<ID>`.
 
* Create the **Subnet** using `vpc-<ID>`, the provided YAML, and `kubectl apply`:
```
cat <<EOF > subnet.yaml
apiVersion: ec2.services.k8s.aws/v1alpha1
kind: Subnet
metadata:
  name: subnet-ack-test
spec:
  cidrBlock: 10.0.0.0/20
  vpcID: vpc-<ID>
EOF
 
kubectl apply -f subnet.yaml
```
 
* Check the **Subnet** availability and ID using `kubectl describe`:
```
> kubectl describe subnets
...
Status:
  Ack Resource Metadata:
    Arn:                       arn:aws:ec2:us-west-2:<ID>:subnet/subnet-<ID>
    Owner Account ID:          <ID>
    Region:                    us-west-2
  Available IP Address Count:  4091
  Conditions:
    Last Transition Time:           2022-10-12T17:36:53Z
    Message:                        Resource synced successfully
    Reason:
    Status:                         True
    Type:                           ACK.ResourceSynced
  Default For AZ:                   false
  Map Customer Owned IP On Launch:  false
  Owner ID:                         <ID>
  Private DNS Name Options On Launch:
  State:      available

>   Subnet ID:  subnet-0f0eb8efb37eb43b0

Reviewer 2: If you want to censor the subnet ID, I think you missed this one :)

Events:       <none>
```
 
* Delete the resources:
  * `kubectl delete -f subnet.yaml`
  * `kubectl delete -f vpc.yaml`
 
 
Both resources were successfully deployed, managed, then deleted by their respective controllers. Although contrived, this example highlights how easy it can be to deploy AWS resources via YAML files and how it feels like managing any other K8s resource. 
 

> In this example, waiting for the `vpc-ID` in order to create the **Subnet** was sub-optimal; the workflow didn't feel declarative. The next example alleviates these concerns using a single manifest (YAML) to deploy the entire network topology.

Reviewer 2: > waiting for the `vpc-ID` in order to create the **Subnet** was sub-optimal

May I suggest:
> waiting for the `vpcID` to be generated and manually updating the Subnet custom resource is not fully declarative.

 
 
### Create a VPC Workflow
 
This section details the steps to create a network topology consisting of multiple, connected resources from a single manifest file. The following resources will be present in said manifest:
* 1 VPC
* 1 Instance
* 1 Internet Gateway
* 1 NAT Gateways
* 1 Elastic IPs
* 2 Route Tables
* 2 Subnets (1 Public; 1 Private)
* 1 Security Group
 
 
The VPC is connected to the internet through an Internet Gateway. The NAT Gateway is created in the public Subnet with an associated Elastic IP. The Instance is deployed into the private Subnet which can connect to the internet using the NAT Gateway in the public Subnet. Lastly, one Route Table (public) will contain a route to the Internet Gateway while the other Route Table (private) contains a route to the NAT Gateway.

* Deploy the resources using the provided YAML and `kubectl apply -f vpc-workflow.yaml`:
 
```
apiVersion: ec2.services.k8s.aws/v1alpha1
kind: VPC
metadata:

>   name: ack-vpc

Reviewer 2: nit: All of these resource names start with `ack-` which is redundant. Perhaps rename to `tutorial-` instead?

spec:
  cidrBlocks: 
  - 10.0.0.0/16
  enableDNSSupport: true
  enableDNSHostnames: true
  tags:
    - key: purpose

>       value: ack-tutorial

Reviewer 2: Maybe rather than `purpose` add a `name` tag?

kind: RouteTable
metadata:
  name: ack-private-route-table-az1
spec:
  vpcRef:
    from:
      name: ack-vpc
  routes:
  - destinationCIDRBlock: 0.0.0.0/0
    natGatewayRef:
      from:
        name: ack-natgateway1
---
apiVersion: ec2.services.k8s.aws/v1alpha1
kind: Subnet
metadata:
  name: ack-public-subnet1
spec:
  availabilityZone: us-west-2a
  cidrBlock: 10.0.0.0/20
  mapPublicIPOnLaunch: true
  vpcRef:
    from:
      name: ack-vpc
  routeTableRefs:
  - from:
      name: ack-public-route-table
---
apiVersion: ec2.services.k8s.aws/v1alpha1
kind: Subnet
metadata:
  name: ack-private-subnet1
spec:
  availabilityZone: us-west-2a
  cidrBlock: 10.0.128.0/20
  vpcRef:
    from:
      name: ack-vpc
  routeTableRefs:
  - from:
      name: ack-private-route-table-az1
---
apiVersion: ec2.services.k8s.aws/v1alpha1
kind: SecurityGroup
metadata:
  name: ack-security-group
spec:
  description: "ack security group"
  name: ack-sg
  vpcRef:
     from:
       name: ack-vpc
  ingressRules:
    - ipProtocol: tcp
      fromPort: 22
      toPort: 22
      ipRanges:
        - cidrIP: "0.0.0.0/0"
          description: "ingress"
```
 
 
{{% hint type="info" title="Referencing Resources" %}}

> Notice that the ACK custom resources reference each other using "*Ref" fields inside the manifest and the user does not have to worry about finding `vpc-ID` when creating the Subnet resource manifests.

Reviewer 2: I might call this out before showing the manifest, so that people are able to read through the manifest with an understanding of resource references in mind

Author: that makes sense! will move it before the manifest.

    Last Transition Time:           2022-10-13T14:54:41Z
    Message:                        Resource synced successfully
    Reason:
    Status:                         True
    Type:                           ACK.ResourceSynced
  Default For AZ:                   false
  Map Customer Owned IP On Launch:  false
  Owner ID:                         515336597380
  Private DNS Name Options On Launch:
  State:      available
  Subnet ID:  subnet-<ID>
 
```
 
### Validate
 
This network setup should allow Instances deployed in the Private Subnet to connect to the internet. To validate this behavior deploy an Instance into the Private Subnet and the Public Subnet (bastion host). After deployments, `ssh` into the bastion host, then `ssh` into the Private Subnet Instance, and test internet connection. Security group is required by both instances launched in public and private subnets.
 
* Deploy an Instance into the Private Subnet:
 
```
apiVersion: ec2.services.k8s.aws/v1alpha1
kind: Instance
metadata:
  name: ack-instance-private
spec:
  imageID: ami-02b92c281a4d3dc79 # AL2; us-west-2
  instanceType: c3.large
  subnetID: subnet-<private-ID>

>   securityGroupIDs:

Reviewer 2: Can we use more references here?

Author: From the instance CRD, I can see that there is no work around for references as of now, we need to manually update the ID's in the manifest.

Reviewer: can you explicitly call out that this field needs to be updated/copied over?

  Map Customer Owned IP On Launch:  false
  Owner ID:                         515336597380
  Private DNS Name Options On Launch:
  State:      available
  Subnet ID:  subnet-<ID>
 
```
 
### Validate
 
This network setup should allow Instances deployed in the Private Subnet to connect to the internet. To validate this behavior deploy an Instance into the Private Subnet and the Public Subnet (bastion host). After deployments, `ssh` into the bastion host, then `ssh` into the Private Subnet Instance, and test internet connection. Security group is required by both instances launched in public and private subnets. 

Note, we need to provide Subnet and SecurityGroup ID's in the yaml manually; run `kubectl describe subnets` and `kubectl describe securitygroups` commands to get ID's.
 
* Deploy an Instance into the Private Subnet using provided yaml and `kubectl apply -f instance-private-subnet.yaml`:
 
```
apiVersion: ec2.services.k8s.aws/v1alpha1
kind: Instance
metadata:
  name: tutorial-instance-private
spec:
  imageID: ami-02b92c281a4d3dc79 # AL2; us-west-2
  instanceType: c3.large
  subnetID: subnet-<private-ID>
  securityGroupIDs:
  - sg-<ID>

>   keyName: us-west-2-key # created via console

Reviewer 3: Recommend we add a note in the text preceding this YAML that the user needs to create their own key via the AWS Console, ensure its file permissions are properly set, and supply the name of that key under `keyName` in both files.

Reviewer 3: Already fixed in 361ded5b2363f99823f25feacb9b4c58fec6a5e7. 👍

  tags:
    - key: producer
      value: ack
```
 

> * Deploy an Instance into the Public Subnet using provided yaml and `kubectl apply -f instance-public-subnet`:

Reviewer 3: Recommend adding `.yaml` file extension:

```suggestion
* Deploy an Instance into the Public Subnet using provided yaml and `kubectl apply -f instance-public-subnet.yaml`:
```

 
```
apiVersion: ec2.services.k8s.aws/v1alpha1
kind: Instance
metadata:
  name: tutorial-instance-public
spec:
  imageID: ami-02b92c281a4d3dc79 # AL2 in us-west-2
  instanceType: c3.large
  subnetID: subnet-<public-ID>
  securityGroupIDs:
  - sg-<ID>
  keyName: us-west-2-key # created via console
  tags:
    - key: producer
      value: ack
```
 
* Deployed 2 instances; one to each Subnet

>   * The instance in the public subnet will be the bastion host so we can ssh to the Instance in the private Subnet

Reviewer 3: Recommend adding a note that you will need to go to the EC2 Console to get the Public DNS of the public instance, because `kubectl describe instances` only displays the Private DNS Name, not Public DNS Name.

Author: Need to cross-check this, if we cannot see the Public DNS Name using `kubectl describe instances` will add the note.

Author: Added a note, as currently we cannot view `Public IPV4 DNS Name` of launched public instance via `kubectl describe instances` command.

    ```bash

>     scp "/path/created_key_in_console_for_region.pem" ec2-user@<Public IPV4 DNS>:

Reviewer 3: Note that `scp` also needs to supply the key for authentication, in addition to trying to copy the key file. The `ssh` commands on the following lines already have the necessary `-i` parameter; we should add it here too.

The command should look like this (it's a little unwieldy, unfortunately...):

```suggestion
    scp -i "/path/created_key_in_console_for_region.pem" "/path/created_key_in_console_for_region.pem" ec2-user@<Public IPV4 DNS>:
```

    ssh -i "/path/created_key_in_console_for_region.pem" ec2-user@<Public IPV4 DNS>
    ssh -i "created_key_in_console_for_region.pem" ec2-user@<Private IP>
    ```
* Validate instance in private subnet can connect to internet
  * Try to ping websites from your private subnet, sample output looks like
    ```bash
    ping google.com
  
    PING google.com (142.250.217.78) 56(84) bytes of data.
    64 bytes from sea09s29-in-f14.1e100.net (142.250.217.78): icmp_seq=1 ttl=102 time=8.30 ms
    64 bytes from sea09s29-in-f14.1e100.net (142.250.217.78): icmp_seq=2 ttl=102 time=7.82 ms
    64 bytes from sea09s29-in-f14.1e100.net (142.250.217.78): icmp_seq=3 ttl=102 time=7.77 ms
    ^C
    --- google.com ping statistics ---
    3 packets transmitted, 3 received, 0% packet loss, time 2003ms
    ```
 
### Cleanup
 

> Remove all the resources using `kubectl delete` command.

Reviewer 3: Recommend we add a note that deleting resources can take a few minutes (5.5 minutes in my case), and users should not kill the `kubectl delete` command even though they see the expected output--wait until it finishes completely.

```bash
kubectl delete -f tutorial-instance-public.yaml

> kubectl delete -f tutorial-instance-private.yaml

Reviewer 3: These files had different names earlier in the tutorial. Recommend using the same names, whichever one you pick.

kubectl delete -f vpc-workflow.yaml
```
 
The output of delete commands should look like
 
```bash

> instance.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-instance-public.yaml deleted
> instance.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-instance-private.yaml deleted

Reviewer 3: My output did not include `.yaml`, since it's referring to the resource name, not the definition file.

```suggestion
instance.ec2.services.k8s.aws "tutorial-instance-public" deleted
instance.ec2.services.k8s.aws "tutorial-instance-private" deleted
```

```
 
* Check the **Subnet** availability and ID using `kubectl describe`:
```
> kubectl describe subnets
...
Status:
  Ack Resource Metadata:
    Arn:                       arn:aws:ec2:us-west-2:<ID>:subnet/subnet-<ID>
    Owner Account ID:          <ID>
    Region:                    us-west-2
  Available IP Address Count:  4091
  Conditions:
    Last Transition Time:           2022-10-12T17:36:53Z
    Message:                        Resource synced successfully
    Reason:
    Status:                         True
    Type:                           ACK.ResourceSynced
  Default For AZ:                   false
  Map Customer Owned IP On Launch:  false
  Owner ID:                         <ID>
  Private DNS Name Options On Launch:
  State:      available
  Subnet ID:  subnet-<ID>
Events:       <none>
```
 
* Delete the resources:
  * `kubectl delete -f subnet.yaml`
  * `kubectl delete -f vpc.yaml`
 
 
Both resources were successfully deployed, managed, then deleted by their respective controllers. Although contrived, this example highlights how easy it can be to deploy AWS resources via YAML files and how it feels like managing any other K8s resource. 
 

> In this example, waiting for the `vpcID` to be generated and manually updating the Subnet custom resource is not fully declarative. The next example alleviates these concerns using a single manifest (YAML) to deploy the entire network topology.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In this example, we used multiple YAML manifests and waited for the `vpcID` to be generated before manually updating the Subnet custom resources to reference that VPC ID. This technique is less aligned to a fully declarative, GitOps-style of configuration management because dependencies between resources need to be manually resolved using a specific order of operations. The next example uses a single YAML manifest to deploy an entire network topology using ACK Resource References, a technique that better aligns with a fully automated and declarative GitOps-style of configuration management.
```

 
 
### Create a VPC Workflow
 

> This section details the steps to create a network topology consisting of multiple, connected resources from a single manifest file. The following resources will be present in said manifest:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In this section, we create a network topology consisting of multiple, connected resources using a single YAML manifest. The following resources are present in this network topology:
```

> This section details the steps to create a network topology consisting of multiple, connected resources from a single manifest file. The following resources will be present in said manifest:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In this section, we create a network topology consisting of multiple, connected resources using a single YAML manifest. The following resources are present in this network topology:
```

* 1 VPC
* 1 Instance
* 1 Internet Gateway
* 1 NAT Gateways
* 1 Elastic IPs
* 2 Route Tables
* 2 Subnets (1 Public; 1 Private)
* 1 Security Group
 
 

> The VPC is connected to the internet through an Internet Gateway. The NAT Gateway is created in the public Subnet with an associated Elastic IP. The Instance is deployed into the private Subnet which can connect to the internet using the NAT Gateway in the public Subnet. Lastly, one Route Table (public) will contain a route to the Internet Gateway while the other Route Table (private) contains a route to the NAT Gateway.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The VPC is connected to the Internet through an Internet Gateway. A NAT Gateway is created in the public Subnet with an associated Elastic IP. An Instance is deployed into the private Subnet which can connect to the Internet using the NAT Gateway in the public Subnet. Lastly, one Route Table (public) will contain a route to the Internet Gateway while the other Route Table (private) contains a route to the NAT Gateway.
```

{{% hint type="info" title="Referencing Resources" %}}
Notice that the ACK custom resources reference each other using "*Ref" fields inside the manifest and the user does not have to worry about finding `vpc-ID` when creating the Subnet resource manifests.
 
Refer to [API Reference](https://aws-controllers-k8s.github.io/community/reference/) for *EC2*
to find the supported reference fields.
{{% /hint %}}

> Note, if the region used while installing helm chart is different from us-west-2, we need to modify availability zones and CIDR ranges in the provided yaml based on the region.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Note, if the region used while installing the Helm chart is different from `us-west-2`, we need to modify availability zones and CIDR ranges in the provided YAML to match the needed region.
```

metadata:
  name: tutorial-private-subnet1
spec:
  availabilityZone: us-west-2a
  cidrBlock: 10.0.128.0/20
  vpcRef:
    from:
      name: tutorial-vpc
  routeTableRefs:
  - from:
      name: tutorial-private-route-table-az1
---
apiVersion: ec2.services.k8s.aws/v1alpha1
kind: SecurityGroup
metadata:
  name: tutorial-security-group
spec:
  description: "ack security group"
  name: tutorial-sg
  vpcRef:
     from:
       name: tutorial-vpc
  ingressRules:
    - ipProtocol: tcp
      fromPort: 22
      toPort: 22
      ipRanges:
        - cidrIP: "0.0.0.0/0"
          description: "ingress"
```
 
The output should look similar to:
```
vpc.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-vpc created
internetgateway.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-igw created
natgateway.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-natgateway1 created
elasticipaddress.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-eip1 created
routetable.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-public-route-table created
routetable.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-private-route-table-az1 created
subnet.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-public-subnet1 created
subnet.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-private-subnet1 created
securitygroup.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-security-group created
```

> * Check the CRD's installed using `kubectl get crds`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Check the CRDs have been installed using `kubectl get crds`:
```

> The output should look similar to:

Reviewer 4: recommend removing this line.

```
NAME                                         CREATED AT
adoptedresources.services.k8s.aws            2022-10-15T01:58:26Z
dhcpoptions.ec2.services.k8s.aws             2022-10-15T01:58:26Z
elasticipaddresses.ec2.services.k8s.aws      2022-10-15T01:58:26Z
eniconfigs.crd.k8s.amazonaws.com             2022-09-30T23:00:32Z
fieldexports.services.k8s.aws                2022-10-15T01:58:26Z
instances.ec2.services.k8s.aws               2022-10-15T01:58:27Z
internetgateways.ec2.services.k8s.aws        2022-10-15T01:58:27Z
natgateways.ec2.services.k8s.aws             2022-10-15T01:58:27Z
routetables.ec2.services.k8s.aws             2022-10-15T01:58:27Z
securitygrouppolicies.vpcresources.k8s.aws   2022-09-30T23:00:35Z
securitygroups.ec2.services.k8s.aws          2022-10-15T01:58:28Z
subnets.ec2.services.k8s.aws                 2022-10-15T01:58:28Z
transitgateways.ec2.services.k8s.aws         2022-10-15T01:58:28Z
vpcendpoints.ec2.services.k8s.aws            2022-10-15T01:58:28Z
vpcs.ec2.services.k8s.aws                    2022-10-15T01:58:28Z

> ```

Reviewer 4: You might want to move this into the section above `Install ACK EC2-Controller`, since it's not really relevant to the single YAML manifest example you are doing here.

> * Check the **Custom Resource's** using `kubectl describe`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Check the resources you just created using `kubectl describe`:
```

```
kubectl describe vpcs
kubectl describe internetgateways
kubectl describe routetables
kubectl describe natgateways
kubectl describe elasticipaddresses
kubectl describe subnets
kubectl describe securitygroups
```
 

> * Subnet gets into an 'available' state with a `ACK.ReferencesResolved = True` condition attached notifying users that the references (VPC, RouteTable) have been found and resolved:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Note that Subnet gets into an 'available' state with a `ACK.ReferencesResolved = True` condition attached notifying users that the references (VPC, RouteTable) have been found and resolved:
```

 
```
Status:
  Ack Resource Metadata:
    Arn:                       arn:aws:ec2:us-west-2:<ID>:subnet/subnet-0ba22f5820bb41584
    Owner Account ID:          <ID>
    Region:                    us-west-2
  Available IP Address Count:  4091
  Conditions:
    Last Transition Time:           2022-10-13T14:54:39Z
    Status:                         True
    Type:                           ACK.ReferencesResolved
    Last Transition Time:           2022-10-13T14:54:41Z
    Message:                        Resource synced successfully
    Reason:
    Status:                         True
    Type:                           ACK.ResourceSynced
  Default For AZ:                   false
  Map Customer Owned IP On Launch:  false
  Owner ID:                         515336597380
  Private DNS Name Options On Launch:
  State:      available
  Subnet ID:  subnet-<ID>
 
```
 
### Validate
 

> This network setup should allow Instances deployed in the Private Subnet to connect to the internet. To validate this behavior deploy an Instance into the Private Subnet and the Public Subnet (bastion host). After deployments, `ssh` into the bastion host, then `ssh` into the Private Subnet Instance, and test internet connection. Security group is required by both instances launched in public and private subnets. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This network setup should allow Instances deployed in the Private Subnet to connect to the Internet. To validate this behavior, deploy an Instance into the private Subnet and the public Subnet (bastion host). After waiting until the Instances are in an `available` state, `ssh` into the bastion host, then `ssh` into the private Subnet Instance, and test internet connectivity. A SecurityGroup is required by both instances launched in the public and private Subnets. 
```

Note, we need to provide Subnet and SecurityGroup ID's in the yaml manually; run `kubectl describe subnets` and `kubectl describe securitygroups` commands to get ID's. We need to create key-pair via console and provide in yaml to launch instances.
 

> * Deploy an Instance into the Private Subnet using provided yaml and `kubectl apply -f tutorial-instance-private.yaml`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Deploy an Instance into the Private Subnet using provided YAML and `kubectl apply -f tutorial-instance-private.yaml`:
```

 
```
apiVersion: ec2.services.k8s.aws/v1alpha1
kind: Instance
metadata:
  name: tutorial-instance-private
spec:
  imageID: ami-02b92c281a4d3dc79 # AL2; us-west-2
  instanceType: c3.large
  subnetID: subnet-<private-ID>
  securityGroupIDs:
  - sg-<ID>
  keyName: us-west-2-key # created via console
  tags:
    - key: producer
      value: ack
```
 

> * Deploy an Instance into the Public Subnet using provided yaml and `kubectl apply -f tutorial-instance-public.yaml`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Deploy the bastion host Instance into the Public Subnet using provided YAML and `kubectl apply -f tutorial-instance-public.yaml`:
```

 
```
apiVersion: ec2.services.k8s.aws/v1alpha1
kind: Instance
metadata:

>   name: tutorial-instance-public

Reviewer 4: might want to call this `bastion-host` or something like that to match how you describe this instance above.

spec:
  imageID: ami-02b92c281a4d3dc79 # AL2 in us-west-2
  instanceType: c3.large
  subnetID: subnet-<public-ID>
  securityGroupIDs:
  - sg-<ID>
  keyName: us-west-2-key # created via console
  tags:
    - key: producer
      value: ack
```

>  Note, we need to get `Public IPV4 DNS` for public instance from EC2 console and substitute in the below commands.

Reviewer 4: Do we have to use the EC2 console to get this? We should be able to use `kubectl describe instances` to get the Public IPv4 DNS information from the Instance record's `Status.publicDNSName` field.

Author: Yes, we need to use the EC2 console to get `Public IPV4 DNS`, `Status.publicDNSName` value remains blank, we can see only private IP on running `kubectl describe instances`

Reviewer 4: @LikithaVemulapalli doesn't that seem like a buggy behaviour to you? :) I mean, everything that one sees in the console should be visible in the ACK resource's Status and Spec...

Reviewer 4: Sounds good :) I won't hold this up further but remember to update the tutorial once you've addressed that! :)

  - [kubectl](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/install-kubectl.html) - A command line tool for working with Kubernetes clusters.
  - [eksctl](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/eksctl.html) - A command line tool for working with EKS clusters.
  - [Helm 3.8+](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/) - A tool for installing and managing Kubernetes applications.
  - [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) - A tool to build, share, and run containers.
 
 
### Install ACK EC2-Controller
 
Deploy the EC2-Controller using the Helm chart, [ec2-chart](https://gallery.ecr.aws/aws-controllers-k8s/ec2-chart). Note, this example creates resources in the `us-west-2` region, but you can use any other region supported in AWS.
 
* Log into the Helm registry that stores the ACK charts:
 
```bash
aws ecr-public get-login-password --region us-east-1 | helm registry login --username AWS --password-stdin public.ecr.aws
```

* Install Helm chart:
 
```bash
export SERVICE=ec2
export RELEASE_VERSION=$(curl -sL "https://api.github.com/repos/aws-controllers-k8s/${SERVICE}-controller/releases/latest" | grep '"tag_name":' | cut -d'"' -f4)

> helm install --create-namespace -n ack-system oci://public.ecr.aws/aws-controllers-k8s/ec2-chart "--version=${RELEASE_VERSION}" --generate-name --set=aws.region=us-west-2

Author: Done!

      value: vpc-tutorial
---
apiVersion: ec2.services.k8s.aws/v1alpha1
kind: InternetGateway
metadata:
  name: tutorial-igw
spec:
  vpcRef:
    from:
      name: tutorial-vpc
---
apiVersion: ec2.services.k8s.aws/v1alpha1
kind: NATGateway
metadata:
  name: tutorial-natgateway1
spec:
  subnetRef:
    from:
      name: tutorial-public-subnet1
  allocationRef:
    from:
      name: tutorial-eip1
---
apiVersion: ec2.services.k8s.aws/v1alpha1
kind: ElasticIPAddress
metadata:
  name: tutorial-eip1
spec:
  tags:
    - key: name
      value: eip-tutorial
---
apiVersion: ec2.services.k8s.aws/v1alpha1
kind: RouteTable
metadata:
  name: tutorial-public-route-table
spec:
  vpcRef:
    from:
      name: tutorial-vpc
  routes:
  - destinationCIDRBlock: 0.0.0.0/0
    gatewayRef:
      from:
        name: tutorial-igw
---
apiVersion: ec2.services.k8s.aws/v1alpha1
kind: RouteTable
metadata:
  name: tutorial-private-route-table-az1
spec:
  vpcRef:
    from:
      name: tutorial-vpc
  routes:
  - destinationCIDRBlock: 0.0.0.0/0
    natGatewayRef:
      from:
        name: tutorial-natgateway1
---
apiVersion: ec2.services.k8s.aws/v1alpha1
kind: Subnet
metadata:
  name: tutorial-public-subnet1
spec:

>   availabilityZone: us-west-2a

Reviewer 3: May want to make a note that the user needs to change the AZ if they're not using `us-west-2` region. My subnets originally said "created" with no errors, but I was not able to find them in the AWS Console because the VPC was in `us-east-2`:

```
vpc.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-vpc created
...
subnet.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-public-subnet1 created
subnet.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-private-subnet1 created
```

Once I changed the AZs in this file, they created successfully.

```
vpc.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-vpc unchanged
...
subnet.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-public-subnet1 configured
subnet.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-private-subnet1 configured
```

Related question: Why did the subnet report successful creation even though it didn't actually get created?

Reviewer 3: Discussed offline re: subnet creation. This message means that the Kubernetes object has been created, but it will take some time to reconcile that with the actual AWS resources (especially for a subnet, which has dependencies on the NAT gateway and route table that must be created first).

metadata:
  name: tutorial-security-group
spec:
  description: "ack security group"
  name: tutorial-sg
  vpcRef:
     from:
       name: tutorial-vpc
  ingressRules:
    - ipProtocol: tcp
      fromPort: 22
      toPort: 22
      ipRanges:
        - cidrIP: "0.0.0.0/0"
          description: "ingress"
```
 
The output should look similar to:
```
vpc.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-vpc created
internetgateway.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-igw created
natgateway.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-natgateway1 created
elasticipaddress.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-eip1 created
routetable.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-public-route-table created
routetable.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-private-route-table-az1 created
subnet.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-public-subnet1 created
subnet.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-private-subnet1 created
securitygroup.ec2.services.k8s.aws/tutorial-security-group created
```

* Check the CRD's installed using `kubectl get crds`:

The output should look similar to:
```
NAME                                         CREATED AT
adoptedresources.services.k8s.aws            2022-10-15T01:58:26Z
awsnodetemplates.karpenter.k8s.aws           2022-09-30T23:16:40Z

> clusterinterceptors.triggers.tekton.dev      2022-09-30T23:20:17Z

Reviewer 3: Several references here to `tekton.dev` and `karpenter.k8s.aws`, which are unrelated to this ACK module. If I ignore those lines, the output I got matches yours:

```
NAME                                         CREATED AT
adoptedresources.services.k8s.aws            2022-10-25T16:16:32Z
dhcpoptions.ec2.services.k8s.aws             2022-10-25T16:16:18Z
elasticipaddresses.ec2.services.k8s.aws      2022-10-25T16:16:20Z
eniconfigs.crd.k8s.amazonaws.com             2022-08-23T20:39:11Z
fieldexports.services.k8s.aws                2022-10-25T16:16:33Z
instances.ec2.services.k8s.aws               2022-10-25T16:16:21Z
internetgateways.ec2.services.k8s.aws        2022-10-25T16:16:22Z
natgateways.ec2.services.k8s.aws             2022-10-25T16:16:23Z
routetables.ec2.services.k8s.aws             2022-10-25T16:16:25Z
securitygrouppolicies.vpcresources.k8s.aws   2022-08-23T20:39:14Z
securitygroups.ec2.services.k8s.aws          2022-10-25T16:16:26Z
subnets.ec2.services.k8s.aws                 2022-10-25T16:16:27Z
transitgateways.ec2.services.k8s.aws         2022-10-25T16:16:28Z
vpcendpoints.ec2.services.k8s.aws            2022-10-25T16:16:30Z
vpcs.ec2.services.k8s.aws                    2022-10-25T16:16:31Z
```

Author: I think I have tekton stuff in the same namespace, will delete other unrelated crds.
